[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello.
My name's Gregg
Braden, and I'd like
to welcome you to this very
special presentation of Missing
Links--
Simulation By Design.
Are We Living in
a Virtual Reality?
In the last episode, we
discovered that the key
to mastering our simulated world
is our ability to self-regulate
our inner experiences--
our thoughts, feelings,
emotions, and beliefs.
In this episode, we're going
to go beyond our bodies
to explore the
field that connects
all things and the
master code that
governs the patterns
of energy in our world
as well as in our lives.
In 1949, the man known as the
father of modern computers
asked a question that
seemed off-the-charts
radical in his day.
The man's name was Konrad
Zuse, and his question
is actually the topic
of this entire series.
Zuse asked if it's possible
that the universe operates
just the way a
giant computer does,
with a futuristic program
running somewhere out
there in the universe that's
cranking out the energy
and the information that
makes us what we are
and our world as it is.
In other words, in
today's language,
Zuse was asking if we are
living in a virtual world that
operates like a 3D printer the
size of the whole universe.
Wow, what a powerful question.
I can only imagine how
it was received in 1949,
but in recent times, we now
know that the answer to Zuse's
question is a resounding yes.
Not only is it possible, but as
we saw earlier in the series,
it's more likely than not that
we are living in a computer
simulation.
Zuse was a man far
ahead of his time,
and his question didn't
make a lot of sense
to the people of
his time until later
in the 20th century, when
high-speed computers made
it possible to run
simulated experiences
in virtual realities.
As a testament to just how
powerful his ideas were,
it was Zuse's
thinking that formed
the basis for the hugely
popular science fiction movie
The Matrix in 1999.
So for the rest of
this episode, I'd
like to explore Zuse's question
on a much deeper level.
I want to get into the nuts
and bolts of precisely how such
a simulation could actually work
and what it means for us today.
Let's get started.
The key to mastering
our simulation
is that everything
in our world is
made of energy,
patterns of energy,
that can be thought
of as information.
Just the way the energy
from a television station
becomes information
to the television set
in your living
room or your laptop
or your iPad, the
energy that surrounds
us can be thought of as a
sea of living information.
So from mountains and rocks
and trees and flowers to you
and me and all life, everything
is made of this information.
The point here is that
for so much information
to be constantly
flowing and to continue
for such a long
period of time, there
must be a mechanism
that keeps things going,
a self-replicating,
self-sustaining code
of some kind.
That code was a
mystery until 1975,
when scientists discovered
the eloquent yet simple code
that we now know
exists at the most
fundamental levels of nature.
The code is called
a fractal, and it's
all about fractal patterns.
So let's take a look at
fractals, fractal patterns,
how they work, and what
they mean in our simulation.
A fractal can be thought
of as, number one,
a pattern that replicates itself
again and again and again.
Number two, a pattern that is
what is called self-similar
across different scales.
So in other words,
the pattern repeats
itself, the same pattern, from
the smallest levels of the atom
and even below to the largest
levels of our planet and even
beyond.
So here's what I mean.
If we look at an
atom, what we see
is an atom is made of
things, electrons, moving
around a thing, the nucleus.
So this is the pattern, things
are moving around things.
Now, if we look at a
planet with a moon,
we see the same pattern.
We see moons moving
around a planet,
just like electrons
moving around a nucleus,
except it's happening
on a much larger scale.
Now, if we go beyond that--
let's go to a solar system.
What we see are planets
moving around a sun.
It's the same pattern
as we saw for the atom,
but on a much larger scale.
And we can continue this
to the size of galaxies.
So the point here is that
the pattern is the same,
but it is repeating on
different scales of magnitude.
And we say that the pattern
is a fractal pattern.
So the atom is a
fractal pattern of what
we see in the solar system.
The solar system is
a fractal pattern
of what we see in a galaxy.
And the beauty of a fractal
and what makes it so powerful
is that if we understand
how the pattern of energy
works on the small scale,
it gives us insight
into what's happening
on the larger scale.
We understand the
relationship between electrons
and the nucleus.
It gives us insight into the
relationships between moons
and the planet or
planets and the sun.
So this is one example of
how fractal patterns play out
in nature on levels that
vary from the very small
to the very large.
The beauty of a fractal pattern
is that regardless of how
complex a fractal appears
to be, every one of them
are made from a
very simple formula.
It is called a recursive
code, and you're looking at it
on your screen right now.
The code looks
like this, and I'm
going to just give you an
example with variables.
Z is the output of the
code on the left-hand side
of the equal sign.
On the right-hand side, we see
the actual code, the very, very
simple formula Z squared
plus C. And all this means
is that the information on
the right-hand side, as we
calculate that information
and it puts out
the result of that
calculation, that result
becomes the new input
for the next calculation.
So this code simply means that
the output of one calculation
becomes the input for the
next, and in this way,
the equation is self-sustaining.
And that's what makes
the fractal code so very
powerful in our simulation.
Once this code
was discovered, it
was recognized everywhere,
from the branches
of trees and plants to
the way rivers form.
The veins and the arteries
within our bodies,
the branching patterns of
the way the blood flows
within our bodies is
actually following
precisely the same pattern.
Even to the level of
how our cells reproduce.
So I'm giving you these
examples so that you
can see how it's
possible for one code
to sustain itself and
repeat itself seemingly
on an endless scale again
and again and again,
putting out new information
into the system.
This is the
fundamental code that
keeps our simulation running.
It is eloquent.
It is simple.
It is so beautiful.
So now that we understand
the code itself,
what I'd like to do is give you
a few examples of precisely how
this code works.
I want you to be very,
very clear in your mind
how this code is working.
And this is going
to be important,
because in future
episodes, we're
going to begin asking
questions about our simulation.
How long does it last?
How will it end?
And to answer those
kinds of questions,
we've got to
understand this code.
That's why I'm going to spend
a little bit of time sharing
this with you right now.
The image that you're
seeing on your screen
is going to help
understand this process.
I'm going to begin
with a straight line.
And in the center of
that straight line,
if we break the line apart and
we put an equal-sided triangle
in the center of the
line, that triangle
is the beginning of what
is called a Koch snowflake.
A Koch snowflake is an
example of a fractal pattern.
If we take each of the lines
that you now see on your screen
and in the midpoint of each
of those straight lines,
we place another triangle,
you see that the perimeter
is becoming more complex.
And if we do this again,
and again, and again, you
see that the simple
snowflake gets
very complex very, very fast.
I'm going to share
with you an animation
so you can see precisely
how this works,
so that you can see the
simplicity of the snowflake
going from very simple to
more complex, to more complex,
to more complex.
And this is important,
because as we
move beyond the static charts,
beyond the line drawings,
and you see in two dimensions
and you see the dynamics of how
this fractal pattern creates
this snowflake that becomes
more complex and
more complex, this
is an analogy for
what is actually
happening in our simulation.
We have patterns that begin
on a very simple level.
They become more
and more complex.
And I want you to notice how
the edges become more complex.
Here's the key.
The pattern itself doesn't
really change in size.
It stays pretty much the same.
That is a very, very
powerful concept.
Because what you're seeing
is an illustration of how
a simple code feeding
itself its own output
can continue calculations
for a long period of time
that seem to be indefinite,
but they're not.
This is precisely how
a simulation runs.
It continues to
process and calculate
until it reaches
some kind of limit,
either a limit of complexity
or a limit in time,
how long the process
can continue to run.
So I'm sharing
these ideas with you
now on the fractal
level of the snowflake
because what we begin to
understand on this level
is going to apply to our
entire simulation in our lives
and answer some of
the deepest questions
and solve some of the
greatest mysteries
that we're going to look
at in just a few minutes.
So it's precisely these
kinds of patterns,
these self-replicating
patterns, that we see in nature,
and we see it everywhere.
You see it on a
head of broccoli.
You see it in the
nautilus shell.
The chambers begin from the
center, and they unfold.
They become larger
and larger and larger,
but they're precisely
the same patterns.
You see it in the branching
patterns of rivers
and streams that you see
from satellite images.
And you see it as you
stand on the ground
and you look up to the
branches of the trees.
As different as those patterns
appear from one another,
they are based upon the same
principle-- a small pattern
repeating itself and
again on different scales.
This is the power of
the fractal patterns.
What scientists found in 1975
was that this pattern, in fact,
was so much closer to the
way that nature actually
works that this thinking now
has replaced the old ideas when
it comes to the natural world.
Remember when we
were kids and we
used to draw a
picture of a tree,
and the tree used to be a stick
with a circle on top of it?
We were using geometric
patterns that we
know to create and replicate
the nature that we see.
So they were approximations.
Well, a stick with a
circle on top of it
to approximate a tree, I think
you'll agree, is simply that.
It is an approximation.
We have to use our
imagination to make
the link between that
representation and the tree
that we actually
see in our backyard.
But what scientists
found in 1975,
they no longer needed to make
those kinds of approximations.
Because the fractal geometry,
the fractal mathematics
that I've just shared with
you, replicates nature almost
to a T. So now, scientists are
using these fractal patterns
to represent the
natural world in ways
that we've never done before.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In fact, this code reproduces
nature so well that we often
cannot even tell a fractal
generated image from the real
thing.
And you've already seen this,
because in the first episode
of this series, I shared with
you a series of natural images.
I showed you mountains.
Some of them had snow.
Some of them were covered
with green forest.
And I asked you, are
these photographs,
are these real
images, or are they
digital images that have
been reproduced artificially?
Now, I can explain to an even
greater degree what I was
showing you in those images.
Every one of those
was a fractal image.
It was produced from the code
Z equals Z squared plus C.
So what happens with
that code, Z squared--
we give the Z a value.
And then we take that
value times itself,
Z squared, and we
add another value.
And the output from
that calculation
becomes the input for
the next calculation.
And it continues again
and again and again,
this self-replicating
code that feeds itself.
Again, seemingly on
an infinite level.
We're going to see in a moment
it's not quite infinite.
And that's why it's important
to understand this when
it comes to our simulation.
So what I want you
to see right now
is that this idea of
a fractal code, it
appears to approximate nature
so well that scientists now
believe that this is the
fundamental code that underlies
all of the natural world.
It is this code that directs
the cells of our bodies
or the atoms of physical
matter or the molecules
of physical matter.
It directs how
they are combining
to produce the
patterns and the images
that we see in
the natural world.
So in reality, as complex
as our world looks,
we're really looking at a
few very simple patterns
that are self-replicating.
You repeat on varying
scales of magnitude.
And that is precisely the
hallmark of a simulation.
This is how a computer
simulation works.
Mathematic codes are used
to continually put out
the information, to spew
out this information.
And the information is what
we see as the physical reality
of our world.
I know, for some people, it's
a very, very different concept,
and we think of
energy as information.
But the energy of our world is
nothing more than information,
and that is going to be very
important when we consider
our simulation, how it
began, how long it lasts,
and what happens when it ends.
So we're building a
vocabulary right now so we can
have this conversation shortly.
So when we apply this idea
of a simple recursive fractal
code to our
simulated reality, we
discover some very
powerful implications.
Let's go back to our
familiar Koch snowflake
so that I can show you
exactly what I mean here.
There are two big questions
that frequently come up
when we talk about us
living in a simulation.
First question is, what are
the limits of our simulation?
How long can it last?
Are we limited in terms
of the simulation's size?
And after all, if the
universe continues to expand,
how big can it really become?
Question number two,
if we are limited,
how long can this
simulation continue
to run before we
reach that limit?
These are big questions.
The implications are huge.
And our Koch snowflake gives
us the clues to both answers.
And they may
surprise you as much
as they did scientists that
discovered them in 1975.
So let me first summarize what
this snowflake is showing us.
The mathematics show us
that there is, in fact,
a limit when it
comes to the area
that the snowflake may occupy.
However, there
appears to be no limit
as to how complex the edges
of that area can become.
So let me repeat
what I just said.
There appears to
be no limit when
it comes to how complex
the edges of our pattern,
of our snowflake, can become.
But there is a limit to
how large it can grow.
And here's what I mean.
With the first iteration
of the fractal code
to create the
snowflake, the area
increased by a specific amount.
It was by a factor of one third.
Now, with the second iteration,
the area still increases,
but it increases to
a much lesser degree.
It's actually only 4/27.
That is the fractional
degree of the increase.
The third iteration when
we're building those triangles
along the flat edges,
that third iteration
increases by an even
smaller amount of 16/243,
and the fourth iteration by a
factor of 64/2187, and so on.
So you see what's
happening here.
You can see the trend.
It's clear.
The numbers that
represent the area
are getting smaller
and smaller, and they
seem to be moving towards zero.
So intuitively, this
is precisely where we'd
expect those numbers to go.
However, this is where things
get really, really interesting.
Because if we plot this
information on a graph, if we
plot on a graph the complexity
and how the size is changing,
what we see is that the change
does not continue indefinitely.
It actually levels out
at a specific size.
And you're going to find
this size very interesting.
The growth levels out
at 1.6 times the area
of the original triangle.
1.6.
Those of you watching this,
if you watch a lot of Gaia,
I know you've seen
this number before.
It's a very significant number.
It's part of a series that
we see commonly in nature.
We also see it in our
bodies, and we see it
in living systems.
It's part of a series that
is known as the Fibonacci
mathematic series.
1.6.
So what we're saying here
is that the area of our Koch
snowflake does have
a limit in terms
of how large it can become and
how much space it can occupy.
I'm going to pause right there.
I'm going to pause
and invite you now
to think about this in
terms of our simulation.
What this snowflake
is telling us
is that our simulation
has a limit in terms
of how large it can become and
how much space it can occupy.
All right?
Now, the perimeter
of the snowflake,
remember, the
perimeter is getting
more and more and more complex.
It tells us a different story.
The number of times
that the perimeter
can change to
become more complex,
the number of those
little triangles
that we can put
on that perimeter
as the edges become more
and more and more complex,
is infinite.
OK?
And this is good news for us.
This fact is a key to
understanding our simulation,
and here's the reason why.
The rhythms of nature
in the natural world
and the universe all appear
to be governed by cycles.
And the limits that follow
this recursive code,
this suggests that our
simulated world does, in fact,
have limits, both in terms of
how much area the universe may
occupy and how long
our simulation lasts.
However, it also suggests
that the possibilities
of our experience within these
boundaries-- in other words,
how complex our
perimeter may become--
is infinite.
So I'm sharing this
with you as theory
so that you can see the
fundamental patterns,
the mathematics,
the recursive code,
the fractal patterns in nature.
And now we're taking the ideas
that the fractal patterns are
showing us on a small
scale, and we're
applying them to the large
scale of our simulation.
What we're saying is
that there are limits,
and I want you to know
that those limits now
are recognized.
And some of the greatest
minds in physics
agree with everything
that we're saying here.
I want you to hear Stephen
Hawking in a conversation
that he was having with a
number of other physicists.
A portion of that
conversation was recorded.
I'm going to play that
for you right now.
In the case of the
universe, there
seems to be a limiting scale.
It is called the
Planck length, and it's
about a million billion billion
times smaller than an inch.
This means that there is a limit
to how complex the universe can
be.
It also means that
the universe could
be described by a theory that
is fairly simple, at least
on scales of the Planck length.
I just hope that we are
smart enough to find it.
>> So we just used this Koch
snowflake to illustrate these
ideas of limits and
complexity when it comes
to our simulation.
And I did this
specifically so that we
could illustrate the principles
that Stephen Hawking has just
talked about.
You're probably familiar
with these ideas
from another pattern that
is seen much more commonly.
The image that you're
seeing on your screen right
now is called the
Mandelbrot set.
The Mandelbrot set
is also the output
from that fractal code,
that fractal pattern
that we just looked at.
And it shows us
something else that
is very key when we talk about
the limits of our experience
and we talk about the
limits of our simulation.
When the numbers of the fractal
code become very, very small
and they are plotted
as the Mandelbrot set,
they are bound within what
you see as the black pattern
on your screen.
So in this case,
the fractal pattern
is creating patterns of space.
All right?
And depending on the values
that go into the pattern,
the space can become very
large or can become very small.
So when the numbers
are very small,
they're bound by
the black pattern.
When they become
very large, they're
represented by what you see
as the colored portion, which
expands indefinitely.
So once again, what
we're saying is
that our experience
within this pattern
appears to be-- the opportunity
for our experience appears
to be infinite.
But the space that our
simulation occupies
appears to be finite.
And this is why the
Mandelbrot set is so powerful.
When we zoom in to
the Mandelbrot set,
the deeper and
deeper and deeper we
go into the pattern,
what we see is
that the patterns
continue to repeat
the hallmark of a fractal.
They repeat themselves
again and again and again
on infinitely smaller scales.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So let's take this out of the
realm of mathematics and images
on the screen.
Let's think about these patterns
in terms of our lives fractal
patterns repeat again
and on different scales.
You and I already know that.
You know that when you have
a pattern in your life,
when you have a pattern
in your relationships
and you are with one person in
one job with one company in one
city and things
aren't working well,
how many times have
you seen people
that say, OK, I need a change.
So they go to another city,
they find another partner,
another job, another
company, but they
find that the same patterns
are showing up in their lives
again and again and again.
And they say, well,
I didn't choose well.
Let me make another change,
another city, another job,
another company,
another partner.
How many times do we do
this before we realize
that no matter where we
go, the same patterns are
going to show up in our lives
again and again and again?
Now you know the reason.
The reason is because we
are living fractal patterns
in our biology.
We're living fractal
patterns in our emotions.
We're living fractal patterns
in our relationships.
Because the energy
of our simulation,
the information
is governed by the fractal
code, that fractal formula.
And the beauty of
knowing this is
once we change that variable,
once we shift the way we think,
the way we solve our
problems, the way
we think of ourselves, once
we change our self-esteem,
once we change the way we
value our lives or the way
we value other people, that's
the equivalent of changing
the variable in the code.
Now we're writing a new
code, and the new patterns
are going to repeat again
and again and again.
If they're healthy patterns,
that's a really good thing.
So I'm illustrating how
our experience is actually
following the code that governs
the energy and the information
of our entire simulation.
It's a very, very
powerful way to think
about our lives and our world
and what we're experiencing
in our virtual reality.
Now that we understand
the simple mechanism that
allows our simulation to sustain
itself, the fractal code,
it makes perfect
sense that we would
have the inner tools to
master our simulation in order
to live the best lives and to
create the best world possible.
To awaken our tools,
however, we now
need to go one step further to
understand the rules that are
created by the fractal code.
And fortunately for us,
300 years of science
and 5,000 years of
indigenous wisdom
have already done that for us.
In the next episode, we'll
discover those rules, the three
fundamental laws
of physics, and how
they make it possible for us
to master our simulated world.
So I want to thank you for
joining me for today's program.
And be sure to tune in for our
next all new episode of Missing
Links--
Simulation By Design.
Are We Living in
a Virtual Reality?
[THEME MUSIC]